---
templateKey: post
prompt: The river of my life
writer: Angie
date: 2020-05-31T20:39:14.885Z
---
When the river of my life jumped its banks ...'\
\
I was different then, younger and certainly more innocent and naive. Then came the time -the moment even - when everything changed and I was carried along by the tide of that change. It was a river suddenly altering the course of its flow,abruptly veering in a different direction. Like the river, I had no choice -it may be a cliche but I had to jump in or go with the flow wherever it led. I just intuited that the me I was and the world I inhabited were gone forever. My mother left, or rather, was taken from me and with her, the more predictable aspects of my life. She went out shopping one Saturday afternoon, and returned held up by two strangers on either side of her, talking weirdly and incoherently. She rushed past me and headed for the drinks cupboard and downed a large glass of gin, starting to scream obscenities and bang on the table. It was the first time I tasted fear and anxiety – my mouth went dry. This was a ranting and raving stranger to me, not my mother. What should I do? What could I do? I was helpless and felt my body begin to tremble. I had been interrupted during a game of marbles with my cousin, which now seemed irrelevant and foolish. I sensed that my life was suddenly and irrevocably changing. Later, she was taken away and I didn’t see her again for seven months.\
\
\
The next part of the exercise is ‘when the river of my life changed its bank, these people were not there’\
\
My father was not there when it started, but was resting in bed, oblivious to the unfolding drama. My brother was not there but had gone for a walk. Anyway, I don’t believe he could have helped because although he was a good deal older than me, he was a troubled teenager himself and, even then, I often felt like the older child. I now believe he would have been overwhelmed and threatened by what was happening. My favourite aunt was not there, but far away in Cardiff. So, she could not reassure me that everything would be okay in her usual sensible, pragmatic and down-to-earth way. My uncle, the seemingly omniscient psychoanalyst, was not there, but my usually omnipotent father phoned him looking very shaken, and asked him to come quickly. What - in trepidation - I asked myself, could be happening to my mother who by now was screaming that she wanted to die? How could she want to leave us? I was 10 or 11 and my childhood was slipping away and it felt palpable. I could not grab it back. The river of my life had become a crushing torrent of mashed movement, no longer something I loved to watch, to smell, to dip my fingers and feet into, but alien and threatening. Every time I tried to leave my room I was roughly told to go back and stay there. I was like an animal deprived of food and drink. No one was there, but I was, all my senses aroused seeking a solution and explanation for this event that was unintelligible and incomprehensible. None of my friends were there to either console me or make me laugh, but I wasn’t even sure that I would have wanted them there. I felt completely alone, ashamed and guilty that this was my fault because my mother had asked me to go shopping with her, and I refused because I was occupied with my cousin playing marbles, knocking one small round coloured piece of glass into another. No, I couldn’t understand, but knew somewhere in the recesses of wherever my thoughts came from that nothing would be the same again. My mother had left as her usually elegant and coiffed self that day, and returned seven months later for a visit as a dishevelled, scrawny, unrecognisable, pathetic looking specimen who I refused to kiss – it must have seemed like cruel rejection. I had not been allowed to visit her and when I picked flowers for her, my autocratic father threw them away because they were ‘not allowed’. You’d think he’d have waited till he left the house to visit her.\
\
I never cried or outwardly mourned her absence, but my poor brother did. He was devoted to her for the rest of her life, and she to him for there was an unbreakable bond of mutual heartache between them. With hindsight, I can theorise that I was traumatised by the relentless flow shaping the river of my life. When she eventually returned to the family home, no longer a place of sanctuary or safety, but of dark images and memories, I was assigned the role of carer, taking her to see her analyst for that interminable 55 minutes daily. Ultimately, it did no good because I now believe my father did not support it or her, telling her it was time to ‘pull herself together’. I had no understanding of what a nervous breakdown was, or manic depression or paranoia. Now I have had sufficient education to differentiate between certain conditions but I’m still uncomfortable with this labelling of emotional fragility, often feeling it to be formulaic and banal, ignoring what lies beneath. What I understood then and understand today, is that she suffered. Even putting one foot in front of the other required an effort and energy that was absent. I could not be the daughter she needed or wanted, and I was too angry and too sad to care as I tried to become increasingly independent whilst withdrawing into myself.